[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Right now, every one of us
is in the process of thinking.
What we may not realize
is that this very process
affects our reality.
>> One of the fundamental
principles in ancient
Indigenous spiritual traditions
is the understanding that what
we think and what we feel
influences the physical world
around us.
>> American inventor
Henry Ford famously said,
"whether you think you
can or you think you
can't, you're right."
In other words, your beliefs
are frequencies mirrored
in the world around you.
>> And so our thoughts,
feelings, emotions,
and even our beliefs have
physical representations
in the world around us.
>> Well, thoughts really
direct our reality,
both from how we perceive
and the things we make out
of our reality and what's
happening in our environment.
And they can affect
what we manifest out
of the quantum field into
our physical reality.
>> Every time we think,
every thought that we create
in our head actually leaves
our head as a wave of light.
We know this because we can
put a cap on someone's head,
put electrodes on it to pick
up those waves of light,
and send them to a computer
so we can analyze the brain.
When you think about
something, that information
goes out eternally into
space time as a wave.
>> From a physics perspective,
all possibilities exist
as potentials in the field,
which is in constant motion
in the quantum realm.
And each of us has the ability
to visualize and perhaps create
these potentials.
Expanded consciousness
is the state
of being awake and
aware within this field.
>> Now as a scientist
in the modern world,
when I began to hear this,
it didn't make sense,
because my conditioning was that
we're separate from our world,
that we have little influence
over the body within us,
let alone the world around us.
But as the implications
of quantum physics
became widely known
and more accessible,
it became apparent how
this relationship exists.
>> If you were a
distant civilization,
you could pick up that radio
frequency and you could
actually decode it.
So we know that thinking is
important, because it directly
affects everything around us.
Other people, other
things, believe it or not,
can quantum entangle
with those waves of light
and download the information
that you were thinking.
>> Japanese researcher Masaru
Emoto studied how thoughts
affect our physical world.
He experimented with three
beakers of rice and water.
Every day for a month,
he said thankful words
to the first beaker.
For the second one, he
spoke hateful phrases
to the rice such
as, you're an idiot.
He completely ignored
the third beaker.
After 30 days, the
first beaker of rice
gave off a pleasant scent
and began to ferment.
The rice in the second
beaker turned black.
And the rice in the third
beaker started to rot.
>> The worst rice sample is
the one that was ignored.
The same can be said
in our daily lives
when dealing with children.
Ignoring children is the
worst thing we can do.
Even if we have to
scold them occasionally,
communication is very important.
>> Communication, thoughts,
and behaviors have a frequency,
which is why many cultures
emphasize the importance
of speaking, thinking,
and acting with integrity.
>> And it's all about
the words, the vibration,
than the meaning that
we give to those words,
the vibration that we
assign to those words.
>> [BABY TALK]
>> And this begins to help us
to understand the true power
of language in our lives.
>> You did such a
great job on this.
>> Our thoughts could create
static within the field.
They could create
interferences that
get in the way of
the things we're
actually trying to manifest.
We have all this
subconscious thought
that's also going on
below the surface,
and that creates
a lot of ripples
and static and unnecessary
waves upon the field.
>> And this begins to help us
to understand how the power
of a thought can influence
the way that neurons connect,
the way that entire
neural networks connect,
and our ability through those
neural networks to communicate
not only within us, but
to the world around us.
>> Our thoughts constantly
affect the field,
but what in the field influences
our thoughts and consciousness?
And what role does
the brain play?
>> When we observe
the human brain,
there's a few things
that can be deceiving.
One is that we think of it
as the seat of consciousness.
We think of it as this place
where somehow consciousness
is manufactured.
I don't think that is accurate.
You can think of the brain
as like part of the antenna,
that the body is
actually tapping
into a field of information.
>> (OVER RADIO) Unstoppable.
>> Just like a radio set
doesn't have the band in it,
it doesn't have the
announcer in it,
it doesn't have all the
activities that you're hearing,
the football game.
>> (OVER RADIO) Touchdown!
[CHEERING]
>> It actually is just tapping
into a field of information,
electromagnetic waves that are
being received by the antenna
of the radio.
You interpret what's coming
in, and you send it back
through the nature
of your protons
and the Planck field
into the universe.
>> The universe emits a huge
spectrum of frequencies that
can tune our consciousness
in a variety of ways.
[HIGH-PITCHED SOUNDS]
>> When we think about how
sound affects our consciousness,
we have the ability through
chanting, through meditation,
through song to amplify our
thoughts to a greater degree
than perhaps most realize.
And in amplifying
our thoughts, we're
having a direct effect on not
only our own consciousness,
but the consciousness
of everyone
that we come into contact with.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've found that
when we use music,
it tremendously increased
our mental abilities.
So music is not just for
relaxation, it's not just
for fun, but it's
much more than that.
With music, we can much easier
transform to higher states
of consciousness.
[MUSIC- "THE STAR SPANGLED
BANNER"]
>> You play a national anthem
and people are ready to march
into battle and lay
down their lives.
So music affects
us dramatically.
It's almost like in our culture,
we're programmed by our music.
Just imagine if we
can actually apply
this in a way that is directed
at navigating or directing
our culture into a higher
frequency or vibration.
That's where we're at right now.
[HARMONICA]
>> Music in general,
listening or playing,
is one of the few things that
can light up the whole brain
simultaneously, as
seen on an EEG scan.
This can cause the
consciousness to harmonize
as we can use more of
our total brain capacity
in these coherent states.
>> In old mystical traditions,
people have been using music.
Cultural traditions,
people was using music.
We can't comprehend our
civilization without music.
So without music, we
don't have civilization.
[INTENSE MUSIC]
[DRUMMING]
>> The rhythms of music that
you listen to or the rhythms
of sounds that you expose
yourself to have a very
entraining process
on the psyche.
And if you have the proper
overlay of frequencies,
you can actually bring the
body into a harmonic state
of resonance where the
respiratory system slows down
and the heartbeat slows down.
[CAR HORN]
>> Emotions such as anger,
laughing, or crying--
>> [BABY CRYING]
>> --can move us to be more
synchronized with others.
>> Entrainment is all
around us at all times.
Some examples of
entrainment are when
people are dancing together,
or when women live together,
often their menstrual
cycles will sync up
to the same rhythm.
[CLICKING]
Or if you have a room
full of pendulum clocks,
over a short time,
all of the pendulums
will sync back and forth
to the same rhythm.
All rhythms of life seek
harmony by the nature
of the cosmic pattern
underlying everything.
[DIDGERIDOO]
>> The oldest instrument in the
world was often used to bring
an individual or group
into a state of alignment.
>> The didgeridoo can be used
to entrain a group to a common
frequency, because like the
monochord, it is one note.
Or it can be used
to entrain humans
to the dream time, the cosmos,
the Earth, or each other.
It creates a common vibrational
field that all of those present
can enter into together.
This itself is a ceremony.
[CHEERING]
>> The impacts can be felt
spiritually, mentally,
emotionally, as
well as physically.
>> There are two ways that sound
affects us on a physical level.
The first is called
psychoacoustics,
and this is where the sound goes
into our ears, into our brains,
affects our nervous system, our
heart rate, our respiration,
and our brainwaves.
Very powerful when we're
listening to music,
when we're hearing conversation,
anytime we're using our ears.
But there is a second
way, and this way
is called vibroacoustics.
And this is where the
sound goes into our body
on a cellular level, going down
to our molecules and our DNA.
And this is a very powerful
and important aspect
of the phenomena of sound,
and particularly resonance.
>> Water is one medium that
can help us visualize these
impacts.
>> Some of the most wondrous
work was done by Masaru Emoto,
and he took different
sounds, different thoughts,
different feelings,
different vibrations,
encoded it on the water, and the
water would take on different,
wondrous geometric shapes.
[MUSIC- MOZART, "EINE KLEINE
NACHTMUSIK"]
And my favorite of
his pictures was
a picture of the
Fujiwara Dam from Japan,
which is a secluded dam.
It look like mud.
And then he had a
Buddhist priest chant
a mantra of the Heart
Sutra, actually, over it--
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]----
for 20 minutes.
Re-photographed
it, and it looked
like the most perfect snowflake,
crystalline structure.
>> Dr. Emoto showed that music
as well as the vibrations
of thoughts and emotions all
have an impact on the structure
and arrangement of
water molecules,
which stores this information
as a kind of memory.
[MUSIC - "ODE TO JOY"]
>> We can re-shape water
and the structure of water.
How much of our body
is made of water?
How much of our planet
Can we use sacred
sound, intentional sound
to rearrange our molecular
structure of water
on our cells and our planet?
>> We need only look to
wisdom cultures from the past
for answers.
>> If you go into the Hindu
cultures and the ancient Indian
cultures, you discover that
they have been talking about
the fact that speaking and
talking positively and acting
positively creates
positive karma.
And when you're thinking
and speaking and talking
negatively, you're
creating negative karma.
So karma works in both ways.
And so what they
talk about literally
is learning how to be
of service to others,
learning how to operate
in the frequency
of unconditional
love, learning how
to speak positive to
yourself and also to others
so the universe will return
back to you positivity.
>> Every single culture on Earth
has some kind of meditation
tradition, and each of them
centers on a very specific
brainwave frequency.
So zen meditation is
alpha, and something
like a shamanic
journey is theta,
and the Dalai Lama with these
monks meditating for 30 years,
their meditation is gamma.
So it's sort of like
we've got the big god
room with a bunch of
doors, and each door is
a different meditation practice
from a different culture,
associated with a
different brain frequency.
And one of those doors is
the perfect door for you.
We can entrain your brainwaves
to exactly that pattern
and pick the lock of that
neural program and make it run.
You're not going to necessarily
be enlightened, like,
a 30-year meditator.
But we've stacked
the deck in our favor
with training wheels that is
going to cut 25 years out.
[LAUGHS] It's the promise
of the 21st century.
It's "Star Trek"
high-tech meditation.
>> Many options for expanding
consciousness have existed
since the beginning
of human history.
>> Auditory aids for expanded
states of consciousness are
a phenomena that have
been found in shamanic,
magical traditions
since the beginning.
Whether the shaman is rattling,
hitting a drum, doing a chant,
playing bells or
bowls, blowing vessels,
these are all
designed to enhance
altered states of consciousness,
change brainwaves, and possibly
even go into our
ears, into our brains,
and actually affecting
that portion of the brain,
resonating it that, if you
like, enhances altered states
of consciousness.
>> We are now entering a
new era of state-of-the-art
consciousness technologies.
>> We've got
unprecedented tools.
We've got brain
mapping EEG systems
that can show precisely
what brain frequencies are
associated with different
states of enlightenment.
>> Regardless of the method,
there is a special part
of the brain that is
activated by certain sounds.
>> We know more about the pineal
gland today than we did at any
time in history.
The pineal has long been thought
of as the seat of the soul.
It's the gland in the
center of the brain.
It's essentially the third eye.
In 2002, Israeli researchers
made an astounding discovery.
They discovered that there's
two types of crystals
on and in the pineal gland, and
that these crystals actually
are tuners or resonators.
That if stimulated by
sound, these crystals
have the piezoelectric effect.
They release a positive charge.
And this is quite amazing,
because meditators or people
who have ever had
an experience where
they see a flash of blue light,
for example, have experienced
the pineal gland under
a positive charge,
because we now know that the
sound waves are converted
by the pineal gland
into blue light.
This is very profound,
because often in Christian art
and in other
examples of art, you
will see a blue
halo around figures.
That means that they have
activated their pineal gland,
probably through
the force of sound.
>> What do we feel when the
pineal gland is activated
or when we are entering
expanded states?
>> We're just listening
and letting our body come
into coherence with that which
we are listening to safely.
We're not activating
what's called the amygdala
in the brain, which means fear.
We now are safe and
we're vibrating.
And so we're not judging.
We're not in that state of mind.
We've completely transcended
or default mode network.
We would say we're
inside the sound.
If you have pictures
of Emoto, it
looked like that in your head.
All these ripples are moving
through the inner ocean
inside of you.
The pineal gland itself
is like a tuning fork that
just shakes like this.
And it basically
causes a spiral effect.
That's what Raymond Moody, when
he talks about death and dying.
People move through this
corridor drawn by sound.
Basically, we're now
able to withstand
in octaves to different states
and different perceptions
of reality.
>> But while we're still in
this state of Earthly existence,
we each have a purpose
and decisions to make.
>> We're all fated to
walk this path in life,
and the path is fated
to land us at a fork.
And when we arrive at this
fork, I have to make a decision.
Which fork am I going to make?
And this one over
here is the tugging
of my heart and my soul.
It's telling, go that way.
Go that way.
It's going to make
the best use of you.
Universe says yes to you.
This way is the path of safety.
Adults in my life
are saying, grow up.
Get a job.
Work for safety.
Lay away some money on the
side for your retirement.
Most of us do that.
>> Others take the
road less traveled.
>> And enter into the universal
hero's journey to find
the meaning of my soul.
And when I come to that
fork, that's this right fork.
I can't see how it's going
to work, but it pulls me.
This is when the
synchronicity starts.
>> It's the universe's job
to step in and open doors,
turn the lights green, make
everything served further.
It becomes this flow.
It becomes this synchronized,
serendipitous adventure
that you never know
what's going to happen.
>> Is there a way to tune
ourselves into the cosmic
blueprint so that we're
more inclined to take
the hero's journey?
>> The modern word
for being in tune,
for a person saying I'm in
tune or an athlete saying
I'm in the zone is
neural coherence,
because our neuronal system,
neurons, are vibrating.
And so therefore, when
we have coherence,
they are vibrating
together in unison.
In a state of neural
coherence, we're safe.
We're calm inside.
And we begin to perceive
our world coherently.
We begin to make
choices that are better.
Neural coherence
is a way of saying,
we are now in the
zone in our life.
We are perceiving and
getting accurate information
and feedback from
our external reality,
and we are now in a position
to successfully adapt to it.
So we need neural coherence
to get accurate feedback.
>> Perhaps it's not possible
to be in the zone at all times.
But if we can recognize our
place in the unified field,
we can always realign ourselves
with the divine creation.
>> From a physics perspective,
all possibility exists
as potential in the field.
We are these amazing
creatures that
have this ability to simulate,
to visualize all potentials.
We get to imagine
and question, what
would happen if I did this, and
what would this relationship
look like, and what if
I built this device?
We imagine these things.
But they are potential
until we breathe
into that potential our love
or our fear for what we're
imagining.
>> And this is the scientific
perspective for what
our ancestors have told
us for a long time.
If we think of it and we
love it, or we think of it
and we fear it,
those are the things
that we bring into our
world to experience.
And when we begin
to understand this,
it empowers us to
be creators in a way
that we can learn and
teach one another.
Our greatest mastery is to
know ourselves and the presence
of this ability.
>> What final lessons can modern
neuroscience and masters from
throughout time offer us?
>> There is the work of a
wonderful medical doctor,
an otolaryngologist by the name
of Alfred Tomatis who wrote,
among other things, a book
called "The Conscious Ear."
He delineated
listening from hearing.
Hearing was a passive activity.
Listening was an
active activity.
And when you listen, you're
able to actually access
different levels of
consciousness, working
with the emotional body.
The phenomena of listening
can be truly extraordinary,
whether you simply just sit
there and take a moment,
quiet yourself,
and begin to listen
to the sounds that are around
you and the sounds within you.
And it might be hearing
your heartbeat or breathing.
Did you know that
the word listen
and the word silent
are anagrams,
composed of the same letters?
I like to say, be
silent and listen.
And as you enhance that, you are
therefore altering the very way
that you perceive reality.
>> If we do all of
this collectively,
the results could be profound.
>> We directly influence
the collective.
And that is what is
needed right now.
So from the very
beginning when we're told,
in the beginning
was the word, we
are told the key to our
success, individually and also
collectively.
In the beginning is
the power of the word,
and the word is a frequency
or it's a vibration.
>> And it's the whole network
of collective unconscious.
And the network looks
like a brain network,
looks like a universal network.
It's all the same business,
formed from the same standing
waves, obeying the same rules
of harmonics and overtones
that we see in music.
[BELL RINGING]
It's not so much a
universe as a multi-lyric.
[LAUGHS] It's a song
of the universe.
It's a dance.
It's this thing where the
collective unconscious mind,
way under the hood of
all of us, is sort of
like the 100th monkey thing.
When a minimum quantum number of
monkeys can wash the potatoes,
all monkeys on all islands can
now all of a sudden magically
wash the potatoes.
And that means that if
we can network together
at an unconscious,
collective unconscious level,
a minimum number of
conscious entities
who understand the principles
that we're talking about,
that we can tip
the quantum field.
And we can have a
spontaneous remission
of the cancer that is humanity
on planet Earth right now.
>> The more of us who are
in tuned in a positive,
harmonious way of being,
the greater the impact
on the whole.
[CHANTING]
>> Our exploration of the
secret of sound and the sound
of creation tells us something
very important about ourselves.
We individually are
tuners in a way.
We're like tuning forks.
And it means that we all have
the capacity of influencing
or affecting everyone
and everything
that we come into contact
with at every moment.
>> In our next episode, what
did ancient civilizations know
about the power of harnessing
the human subconscious mind
and the secrets of sacred sound?
Was it enough to move mountains
and build megalithic temples?
The sonic mysteries behind
the ancient megaliths
is up next on
"Sound of Creation."
[MUSIC PLAYING]